## Predicting The Housing Market Using AI And Machine learning

We are living in a time where the housing market is booming, and everyone wants to get rich. Pricing on housing is skyrocketing more than anyone had anticipated and continues to skyrocket more than we still anticipate. Imagine if there was a way, we could predict the pricing, using the technology we have today. In this essay it will be explained how AI can play a key role in predicting how the housing market will look like in some time-period.

To start things off, where would we get our data from? There’s countless of websites online that state listings on the market right now and their past sales. In this essay, we will be using one named hemnet. Hemnet is a Swedish website that shows the geographical location, size in square metres, number of rooms and more features, of houses that are listed and have been sold. You can collect the data from these websites and store this information in a csv file. We store it in a csv file to be able to interact with the file in python. 

Although hemnet is a great source for all this data, there’s always going to be a question of reliability. Hemnet is essentially a collection of all data gathered by other vendors and websites. Thus, it’s a second-hand source at best. This portrays an uncertainty in whether the data it has gathered is accurate or not. However, since it’s a well esteemed website, we can conclude that it is fairly reliable for us to use.

When all data is collected and sorted into their categories, it is time to do some math. In order to predict the housing market, we will need to use something called linear regression. What this entails is a mathematical formula that fits a straight line with one or more independent variables to one dependent variable. An independent variable is a variable such as number of rooms or size of the house. It’s the variable that we would use to compare with similar houses with same variables. The dependent variable is the house price in this case. It’s the variable that we will be testing and looking out for. Since the function produces a straight line, the function formula would be something along the lines of f(x) = mx + c, where m is the gradient of the line and c is where the line cuts the y-axis. The x value would then be our independent variable, such as number of rooms. The function, if properly trained, would output a price relatively close to the actual price if we used all the inputs for all the different independent variables that we have attained. This is how linear regression works. By inputting several trend-following data it will be able to predict with the trendline and a margin of error where the next point will be situated.

The simplicity of using linear regression is what’s key to this way of predicting housing prices. Being able to easily read off of a graph an easy to read trend line with clear projection and values is also key to help visualise this data to the user.

To visualise this data, we need to first make sure all data is quantitative. No data can be difference in type. For example, we cannot compare a garden to a lawn. It must be “does house have pool? Yes.” or “does house have a jacuzzi? No.” In other words, must be in binary. In order for this to be comparable to others, all categories (features) must be present to all other houses but be set to false (0) if they do not attain that certain feature. That way each house to can be compared with every other house through every aspect and feature. Then and only then can we start visualising the data. To start off, name your independent variable and dependent variable. Your dependent variable should be the price of the specific house with the attributed features. The independent variable should be said attributed feature(s). Then insert those in the formula, the price being f(x) and independent variable being x. Then calculate what the gradient would be for that certain house with that attribute. Now do that on a large scale. 

After having collected all the data and have understood how to apply the formula, create a script to do that on a large scale. Apply the formula to each and every house by pulling each data and inserting it into the formula categorically, starting with one attribute and continuing onto the next attribute and so on. When having done so, graph every point out on a scatter chart for every feature and, if possible, with multiple features. Insert a trendline and that should help show the how the house price should, with relative accuracy, increase with the trendline. 

In conclusion, harnessing the power of AI and linear regression to predict housing prices is a valuable and practical endeavour in today’s booming real estate market. By sourcing data from platforms like Hemnet and using linear regression graphing, we can gain valuable insights into how various housing features influence prices. This analytical approach not only helps potential buyers and sellers in making informed decisions but also contributes to a deeper understanding of how the price can fluctuate and increase or decrease over time. Furthermore, it displays the potential of AI-driven solutions to provide relatively accurate price predictions, helping people gain a better understanding of the real estate market.

# Sources:
- “What is linear regression?” IBM, 
https://www.ibm.com/topics/linear-regression
- Yen, Nhi. “#2. Introduction to Linear Regression: Predicting House Prices.” Medium, 24-05-2023,
https://medium.com/@yennhi95zz/2-introduction-to-linear-regression-predicting-house-prices-a36f6172030

